                                  ACT I.



      SCENE I.--Manfred alone.--Scene, a Gothic Gallery.--

                            Time, Midnight.



    Man. The lamp must be replenished, but even then

    It will not burn so long as I must watch:

    My slumbers--if I slumber--are not sleep,

    But a continuance, of enduring thought,

    Which then I can resist not: in my heart

    There is a vigil, and these eyes but close

    To look within; and yet I live, and bear

    The aspect and the form of breathing men.

    But Grief should be the Instructor of the wise;

    Sorrow is Knowledge: they who know the most                         10

    Must mourn the deepest o'er the fatal truth,

    The Tree of Knowledge is not that of Life.

    Philosophy and science, and the springs

    Of Wonder, and the wisdom of the World,

    I have essayed, and in my mind there is

    A power to make these subject to itself--

    But they avail not: I have done men good,

    And I have met with good even among men--

    But this availed not: I have had my foes,

    And none have baffled, many fallen before me--                      20

    But this availed not:--Good--or evil--life--

    Powers, passions--all I see in other beings,

    Have been to me as rain unto the sands,

    Since that all-nameless hour. I have no dread,

    And feel the curse to have no natural fear,

    Nor fluttering throb, that beats with hopes or wishes,

    Or lurking love of something on the earth.

    Now to my task.--

                     Mysterious Agency!

    Ye Spirits of the unbounded Universe![ap]

    Whom I have sought in darkness and in light--                       30

    Ye, who do compass earth about, and dwell

    In subtler essence--ye, to whom the tops

    Of mountains inaccessible are haunts,[aq]

    And Earth's and Ocean's caves familiar things--

    I call upon ye by the written charm

    Which gives me power upon you--Rise! Appear!

                                                                 [A pause.

    They come not yet.--Now by the voice of him

    Who is the first among you--by this sign,

    Which makes you tremble--by the claims of him

    Who is undying,--Rise! Appear!----Appear!                           40

                                                                 [A pause.

    If it be so.--Spirits of Earth and Air,

    Ye shall not so elude me! By a power,

    Deeper than all yet urged, a tyrant-spell,

    Which had its birthplace in a star condemned,

    The burning wreck of a demolished world,

    A wandering hell in the eternal Space;

    By the strong curse which is upon my Soul,

    The thought which is within me and around me,

    I do compel ye to my will.--Appear!



         [A star is seen at the darker end of the gallery: it is

               stationary; and a voice is heard singing.]



                              First Spirit.



      Mortal! to thy bidding bowed,                                     50

      From my mansion in the cloud,

      Which the breath of Twilight builds,

      And the Summer's sunset gilds

      With the azure and vermilion,

      Which is mixed for my pavilion;[ar]

      Though thy quest may be forbidden,

      On a star-beam I have ridden,

      To thine adjuration bowed:

      Mortal--be thy wish avowed!



                      Voice of the Second Spirit.



    Mont Blanc is the Monarch of mountains;                             60

      They crowned him long ago

    On a throne of rocks, in a robe of clouds,

      With a Diadem of snow.

    Around his waist are forests braced,

      The Avalanche in his hand;

    But ere it fall, that thundering ball

      Must pause for my command.

    The Glacier's cold and restless mass

      Moves onward day by day;

    But I am he who bids it pass,                                       70

      Or with its ice delay.[as]

    I am the Spirit of the place,

      Could make the mountain bow

    And quiver to his caverned base--

      And what with me would'st Thou?



                       Voice of the Third Spirit.



    In the blue depth of the waters,

      Where the wave hath no strife,

    Where the Wind is a stranger,

      And the Sea-snake hath life,

    Where the Mermaid is decking                                        80

      Her green hair with shells,

    Like the storm on the surface

      Came the sound of thy spells;

    O'er my calm Hall of Coral

      The deep Echo rolled--

    To the Spirit of Ocean

      Thy wishes unfold!



                              FOURTH SPIRIT.



    Where the slumbering Earthquake

      Lies pillowed on fire,

    And the lakes of bitumen                                            90

      Rise boilingly higher;

    Where the roots of the Andes

      Strike deep in the earth,

    As their summits to heaven

      Shoot soaringly forth;

    I have quitted my birthplace,

      Thy bidding to bide--

    Thy spell hath subdued me,

      Thy will be my guide!



                              FIFTH SPIRIT.



    I am the Rider of the wind,                                        100

      The Stirrer of the storm;

    The hurricane I left behind

      Is yet with lightning warm;

    To speed to thee, o'er shore and sea

      I swept upon the blast:

    The fleet I met sailed well--and yet

      'Twill sink ere night be past.



                              SIXTH SPIRIT.



    My dwelling is the shadow of the Night,

    Why doth thy magic torture me with light?



                             SEVENTH SPIRIT.



    The Star which rules thy destiny no                                110

    Was ruled, ere earth began, by me:

    It was a World as fresh and fair

    As e'er revolved round Sun in air;

    Its course was free and regular,

    Space bosomed not a lovelier star.

    The Hour arrived--and it became

    A wandering mass of shapeless flame,

    A pathless Comet, and a curse,

    The menace of the Universe;

    Still rolling on with innate force,                                120

    Without a sphere, without a course,

    A bright deformity on high,

    The monster of the upper sky!

    And Thou! beneath its influence born--

    Thou worm! whom I obey and scorn--

    Forced by a Power (which is not thine,

    And lent thee but to make thee mine)

    For this brief moment to descend,

    Where these weak Spirits round thee bend

    And parley with a thing like thee--                                130

    What would'st thou, Child of Clay! with me?



                           The SEVEN SPIRITS.



    Earth--ocean--air--night--mountains--winds--thy Star,

      Are at thy beck and bidding, Child of Clay!

    Before thee at thy quest their Spirits are--

      What would'st thou with us, Son of mortals--say?



    Man. Forgetfulness----



    First Spirit.            Of what--of whom--and why?



    Man. Of that which is within me; read it there--

    Ye know it--and I cannot utter it.



    Spirit. We can but give thee that which we possess:

    Ask of us subjects, sovereignty, the power                         140

    O'er earth--the whole, or portion--or a sign

    Which shall control the elements, whereof

    We are the dominators,--each and all,

    These shall be thine.



    Man.                Oblivion--self-oblivion!

    Can ye not wring from out the hidden realms

    Ye offer so profusely--what I ask?



    Spirit. It is not in our essence, in our skill;

    But--thou may'st die.



    Man.                Will Death bestow it on me?



    Spirit. We are immortal, and do not forget;

    We are eternal; and to us the past                                 150

    Is, as the future, present. Art thou answered?



    Man. Ye mock me--but the Power which brought ye here

    Hath made you mine. Slaves, scoff not at my will!

    The Mind--the Spirit--the Promethean spark,[at]

    The lightning of my being, is as bright,

    Pervading, and far darting as your own,

    And shall not yield to yours, though cooped in clay!

    Answer, or I will teach you what I am.[au]



    Spirit. We answer--as we answered; our reply

    Is even in thine own words.



    Man.                      Why say ye so?                         160



    Spirit. If, as thou say'st, thine essence be as ours,

    We have replied in telling thee, the thing

    Mortals call death hath nought to do with us.



    Man. I then have called ye from your realms in vain;

    Ye cannot, or ye will not, aid me.



    Spirit.                         Say--

    What we possess we offer; it is thine:

    Bethink ere thou dismiss us; ask again;

    Kingdom, and sway, and strength, and length of days--



    Man. Accurséd! what have I to do with days?

    They are too long already.--Hence--begone!                         170



    Spirit. Yet pause: being here, our will would do thee service;

    Bethink thee, is there then no other gift

    Which we can make not worthless in thine eyes?



    Man. No, none: yet stay--one moment, ere we part,

    I would behold ye face to face. I hear

    Your voices, sweet and melancholy sounds,

    As Music on the waters; and I see

    The steady aspect of a clear large Star;

    But nothing more. Approach me as ye are,

    Or one--or all--in your accustomed forms.                          180



    Spirit. We have no forms, beyond the elements

    Of which we are the mind and principle:

    But choose a form--in that we will appear.



    Man. I have no choice; there is no form on earth

    Hideous or beautiful to me. Let him,

    Who is most powerful of ye, take such aspect

    As unto him may seem most fitting--Come!



    Seventh Spirit (appearing in the shape of a beautiful

    female figure). Behold!



    Man.        Oh God! if it be thus, and thou

    Art not a madness and a mockery,

    I yet might be most happy. I will clasp thee,                      190

    And we again will be----

                                                   [The figure vanishes.

                            My heart is crushed!

                                               [MANFRED falls senseless.



       (A voice is heard in the Incantation which follows.)



        When the Moon is on the wave,

          And the glow-worm in the grass,

        And the meteor on the grave,

          And the wisp on the morass;

        When the falling stars are shooting,

        And the answered owls are hooting,

        And the silent leaves are still

        In the shadow of the hill,

        Shall my soul be upon thine,                                   200

        With a power and with a sign.



        Though thy slumber may be deep,

        Yet thy Spirit shall not sleep;

        There are shades which will not vanish,

        There are thoughts thou canst not banish;

        By a Power to thee unknown,

        Thou canst never be alone;

        Thou art wrapt as with a shroud,

        Thou art gathered in a cloud;

        And for ever shalt thou dwell                                  210

        In the spirit of this spell.



        Though thou seest me not pass by,

        Thou shalt feel me with thine eye

        As a thing that, though unseen,

        Must be near thee, and hath been;

        And when in that secret dread

        Thou hast turned around thy head,

        Thou shalt marvel I am not

        As thy shadow on the spot,

        And the power which thou dost feel                             220

        Shall be what thou must conceal.



        And a magic voice and verse

        Hath baptized thee with a curse;

        And a Spirit of the air

        Hath begirt thee with a snare;

        In the wind there is a voice

        Shall forbid thee to rejoice;

        And to thee shall Night deny

        All the quiet of her sky;

        And the day shall have a sun,                                  230

        Which shall make thee wish it done.



        From thy false tears I did distil

        An essence which hath strength to kill;

        From thy own heart I then did wring

        The black blood in its blackest spring;

        From thy own smile I snatched the snake,

        For there it coiled as in a brake;

        From thy own lip I drew the charm

        Which gave all these their chiefest harm;

        In proving every poison known,                                 240

        I found the strongest was thine own.



        By the cold breast and serpent smile,

        By thy unfathomed gulfs of guile,

        By that most seeming virtuous eye,

        By thy shut soul's hypocrisy;

        By the perfection of thine art

        Which passed for human thine own heart;

        By thy delight in others' pain,

        And by thy brotherhood of Cain,

        I call upon thee! and compel[av]                               250

        Thyself to be thy proper Hell!



        And on thy head I pour the vial

        Which doth devote thee to this trial;

        Nor to slumber, nor to die,

        Shall be in thy destiny;

        Though thy death shall still seem near

        To thy wish, but as a fear;

        Lo! the spell now works around thee,

        And the clankless chain hath bound thee;

        O'er thy heart and brain together                              260

        Hath the word been passed--now wither!



               SCENE II.--The Mountain of the Jungfrau.--

            Time, Morning.--MANFRED alone upon the cliffs.



    Man. The spirits I have raised abandon me,

    The spells which I have studied baffle me,

    The remedy I recked of tortured me

    I lean no more on superhuman aid;

    It hath no power upon the past, and for

    The future, till the past be gulfed in darkness,

    It is not of my search.--My Mother Earth!

    And thou fresh-breaking Day, and you, ye Mountains,

    Why are ye beautiful? I cannot love ye.

    And thou, the bright Eye of the Universe,                           10

    That openest over all, and unto all

    Art a delight--thou shin'st not on my heart.

    And you, ye crags, upon whose extreme edge

    I stand, and on the torrent's brink beneath

    Behold the tall pines dwindled as to shrubs

    In dizziness of distance; when a leap,

    A stir, a motion, even a breath, would bring

    My breast upon its rocky bosom's bed

    To rest for ever--wherefore do I pause?

    I feel the impulse--yet I do not plunge;                            20

    I see the peril--yet do not recede;

    And my brain reels--and yet my foot is firm:

    There is a power upon me which withholds,

    And makes it my fatality to live,--

    If it be life to wear within myself

    This barrenness of Spirit, and to be

    My own Soul's sepulchre, for I have ceased

    To justify my deeds unto myself--

    The last infirmity of evil. Aye,

    Thou winged and cloud-cleaving minister,                            30

                                                       [An Eagle passes.

    Whose happy flight is highest into heaven,

    Well may'st thou swoop so near me--I should be

    Thy prey, and gorge thine eaglets; thou art gone

    Where the eye cannot follow thee; but thine

    Yet pierces downward, onward, or above,

    With a pervading vision.--Beautiful!

    How beautiful is all this visible world!

    How glorious in its action and itself!

    But we, who name ourselves its sovereigns, we,

    Half dust, half deity, alike unfit                                  40

    To sink or soar, with our mixed essence make

    A conflict of its elements, and breathe

    The breath of degradation and of pride,

    Contending with low wants and lofty will,

    Till our Mortality predominates,

    And men are--what they name not to themselves,

    And trust not to each other. Hark! the note,

                          [The Shepherd's pipe in the distance is heard.

    The natural music of the mountain reed--

    For here the patriarchal days are not

    A pastoral fable--pipes in the liberal air,                         50

    Mixed with the sweet bells of the sauntering herd;

    My soul would drink those echoes. Oh, that I were

    The viewless spirit of a lovely sound,

    A living voice, a breathing harmony,

    A bodiless enjoyment--born and dying

    With the blest tone which made me!



                   Enter from below a CHAMOIS HUNTER.



    Chamois Hunter.                 Even so

    This way the Chamois leapt: her nimble feet

    Have baffled me; my gains to-day will scarce

    Repay my break-neck travail.--What is here?

    Who seems not of my trade, and yet hath reached                     60

    A height which none even of our mountaineers,

    Save our best hunters, may attain: his garb

    Is goodly, his mien manly, and his air

    Proud as a free-born peasant's, at this distance:

    I will approach him nearer.



    Man. (not perceiving the other). To be thus--

    Grey-haired with anguish, like these blasted pines,

    Wrecks of a single winter, barkless, branchless,

    A blighted trunk upon a curséd root,

    Which but supplies a feeling to Decay--

    And to be thus, eternally but thus,                                 70

    Having been otherwise! Now furrowed o'er

    With wrinkles, ploughed by moments, not by years

    And hours, all tortured into ages--hours

    Which I outlive!--Ye toppling crags of ice!

    Ye Avalanches, whom a breath draws down

    In mountainous o'erwhelming, come and crush me!

    I hear ye momently above, beneath,

    Crash with a frequent conflict; but ye pass,

    And only fall on things that still would live;

    On the young flourishing forest, or the hut                         80

    And hamlet of the harmless villager.



    C. Hun. The mists begin to rise from up the valley;

    I'll warn him to descend, or he may chance

    To lose at once his way and life together.



    Man. The mists boil up around the glaciers; clouds

    Rise curling fast beneath me, white and sulphury,

    Like foam from the roused ocean of deep Hell,[aw]

    Whose every wave breaks on a living shore,

    Heaped with the damned like pebbles.--I am giddy.



    C. Hun. I must approach him cautiously; if near,                  90

    A sudden step will startle him, and he

    Seems tottering already.



    Man.                  Mountains have fallen,

    Leaving a gap in the clouds, and with the shock

    Rocking their Alpine brethren; filling up

    The ripe green valleys with Destruction's splinters;

    Damming the rivers with a sudden dash,

    Which crushed the waters into mist, and made

    Their fountains find another channel--thus,

    Thus, in its old age, did Mount Rosenberg--

    Why stood I not beneath it?



    C. Hun.                  Friend! have a care,                    100

    Your next step may be fatal!--for the love

    Of Him who made you, stand not on that brink!



    Man. (not hearing him).

    Such would have been for me a fitting tomb;

    My bones had then been quiet in their depth;

    They had not then been strewn upon the rocks

    For the wind's pastime--as thus--thus they shall be--

    In this one plunge.--Farewell, ye opening Heavens!

    Look not upon me thus reproachfully--

    You were not meant for me--Earth! take these atoms!



         [As MANFRED is in act to spring from the cliff, the

      CHAMOIS HUNTER seizes and retains him with a sudden grasp.



    C. Hun. Hold, madman!--though aweary of thy life,                110

    Stain not our pure vales with thy guilty blood:

    Away with me----I will not quit my hold.



    Man. I am most sick at heart--nay, grasp me not--

    I am all feebleness--the mountains whirl

    Spinning around me----I grow blind----What art thou?



    C. Hun. I'll answer that anon.--Away with me----

    The clouds grow thicker----there--now lean on me--

    Place your foot here--here, take this staff, and cling

    A moment to that shrub--now give me your hand,

    And hold fast by my girdle--softly--well--                         120

    The Chalet will be gained within an hour:

    Come on, we'll quickly find a surer footing,

    And something like a pathway, which the torrent

    Hath washed since winter.--Come,'tis bravely done--

    You should have been a hunter.--Follow me.



           [As they descend the rocks with difficulty, the scene closes.



